Network programmability enable automation and reduces human to machine interaction, which greatly reduces the chance of human error and typos. It is more scalable, can provide version control, and is more efficient for troubleshooting with a system wide view and correlation between events. 

Git is version control software; GitHub is a repository hosting service that adds many of its own features. CI (Continuous Integration)/CD (Continuous Delivery) is a set of operating principals and practices that enable application development teams to deliver code changes more frequently and reliably - frequent changes are more efficient than rolling them into large change windows, implementation is known as the CI/CD pipeline. 

Data serialization is the process of converting structured data to a standardized format that allows sharing or storage of the data in a form that allows recovery of its original structure, allows transfer of data between different systems, applications, and programming languages, XML, JSON, and YAML are human and machine readable, plain text data encoding formats. 

APIs are typically used to perform CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations. Two main APIs over the network are SOAP and REST. SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) is a standard communication protocol system that permits processes to use different operating systems, typically HTTPS and always XML. REST (Representational State Transfer) is an architecture, not a protocol - it gives guidelines for the structure and organization of an API, supports any transport or format, typically HTTPS and JSON. 

REST constraints: client-server architecture, uniform interface, stateless, cacheability - responses must define themselves as either cacheable or non-cacheable, must be a layered system - any intermediary devices must be transparent to the client and server, code on demand - servers can temporarily extend or customize the functionality of a client by transferring executable code. 
REST supports authentication types: no authentication, basic authentication (username and password), API key (encrypted tokens), Bearer token (basic or API key authenticated user requests, encrypted Bearer token is then automatically included in other requests. 
RPC (Remote Procedure Call) allows one system to request another system to execute code. gRPC (Google RPC) is an open source RPC well suited to collecting telemetry statistics. Postman is used to test the operation of REST APIs. Can be downloaded as a stand-alone application or run as a Chrome plugin. 

Ansible is agentless, uses a push model, and communicates over SSH. Modules are prebuilt Python scripts. TCP Port 22
Puppet uses an agent on target devices; Puppet Master runs on a Linux server. Uses a Pull model, checks every 30 minutes by default. Written in Ruby, uses proprietary DSL rather than YML, a Manifest defines device properties, can check configuration consistency. TCP Port 8140
Chef uses an agent on target devices, uses a Pull model, written in Ruby, and uses Cook Books and Recipes. TCP Port 443
Salt is a client/server platform and uses Masters and Minions that communicate using ZeroMQ. TCP Ports 4505 and 4506
Terraform is agentless and uses a Push model. It is an Infrastructure as Code software tool, admins provision infrastructure using HCL (HashiCorp Configuration Language) or JSON. Primarily designed for public and private cloud; it can also work with on premises platforms. Written in Go, it can be installed on Linux, Mac, and Windows. Communicates over REST APIs, NETCONF, SSH, and SNMP. Uses Configuration files (desired state using Resource Blocks - VMs, network devices, etc), state files (lifecycle management), and providers (plug-ins).
A mutable object can be changed after it is created; an immutable object must be destroyed and replaced to make changes. Ansible is mutable by default, Terraform is immutable by default. 
Data (Forwarding) Plane: Traffic which is forwarded through the device - normal traffic. Control Plane: Makes decisions about how to forward traffic, such as routing protocol or spanning tree updates destined to or locally originated on the device itself. Management Plane: The device is configured and monitored in the management plane - at the CLI though Telnet or SSH, via a GUI using HTTPS, or via SNMP or an API. Network infrastructure devices are responsible for their own individual control and data planes in a traditional environment. 
SDN (Software Defined Networking) decouples the data and control planes, network devices are still responsible for forwarding traffic, but the control plane moves to a centralized SDN controller. With a pure SDN, the control plane runs purely on an SDN controller, and the data plane runs purely on the network devices. A hybrid SDN provides the majority of the control plane intelligence, but the network devices retain some control plane intelligence as well as data plane operations. Most implementations use a hybrid SDN. 

SDN Architecture: 
Application layer: SDN business applications
^ Northbound APIs
Control layer: SDN controller (Network Services)
v Southbound APIs
Infrastructure Layer: Networking devices, routers, switches, etc

Cisco Catalyst allows IBN (Intent-Based Networking) which builds on software defined networking to move away from a network of individual devices which are manually managed on-by-one to a controller led network managed as an integrated whole. Continuously monitors and adjusts network performance; can be automated and applied consistently across the network. Used to be called DNA Center - Catalyst is just a rebranding. Runs as a virtual appliance or physical appliance on Cisco UCS server hardware and can be clustered. Network Plug and Play allows routers, switches, and wireless APs to be deployed in remote offices with zero touch configuration. It discovers Catalyst Center thorough DHCP option 43 or DNS. It then registers and downloads its configuration from Catalyst Center. Assurance guarantees that the infrastructure is doing what you intended it to do; Catalyst Center reports problems and provides recommended remediation actions. Also offers Peer Comparison to compare network quality with comparable sized peer networks. Catalyst Center also supports east and west bound APIs for integration with other services such as reporting and analytics servers. 

Traditional Access Control uses fixed VLANs, IP addresses, and ACLs. Users are expected to always connect to the same physical port where they are assigned an access VLAN and IP subnet. Can get complex since each device is configured individually and does not support user mobility. 

SD-Access solves the limitations of traditional access. Traffic flow security is based on user identity, not physical location and IP. Users log in from and can move to any location in the network. Two components needed: Users are authenticated by ISE (Identity Services Engine) and the security policy is configured on the Catalyst Center. SD-Access uses an underlay network - the underlying physical network, and an overlay network - a logical topology used to virtually connect devices. The combination of overlay and underlay forms the SD-Access Network Fabric. Can be deployed on premises or in the cloud; the cloud is more popular. 
	Any configuration can be used for the underlying physical network (brownfield) - any devices, layer 2 or 3, and any routing protocol. Catalyst Center can be used to automatically provision 	the underlay network in new (greenfield) sites. In this case, layer 3 links are used between devices, and IS-IS is used as the routing protocol. 

Overlay Network: LISP is used for the Control Plane. VXLAN tunnels are used for the Data Plane. Cisco TrustSec CTS is used for the policy. 

Traditional WAN Deployments: Individual device configuration; focus is on link connectivity, not the required performance for applications. Difficult to migrate to another WAN service. 

SD-WAN: Automated WAN connectivity between sites; monitoring and failover is automated; Traffic control is application aware. Transport independent, more flexibility, integration with cloud and new network technologies, lower cost. 
WAN Edge Routers run the Data Plane. Can be physical or virtual. They form an IPSec encrypted data plane between each other. Can have 2 for redundancy. 
SD-WAN Controllers run the Control Plane. They are the centralized brain of the solution, run as VMs, distribute policy and forwarding information to the WAN Edge routers inside TLS tunnels. Each WAN Edge router connects to two SD-WAN Controllers for redundancy. 
SD-WAN Manager provides the Management Plane GUI. Enables centralized configuration and simplifies changes. Provides real-time alerting. Runs as a VM. Multiple for redundancy.
SD-WAN Validator: authenticated all SD-WAN Controllers, Managers, and Edge Routers that join the SD-WAN network. Enables WAN Edge Routers to discover Managers, Controllers, and 	each other. Had a public IP address and is deployed in the DMZ. Runs as a VM. Multiple can be deployed with round robin DNS. 

ZTP (Zero Touch Provisioning) is a cloud-based shared service hosted by Cisco. Utilized on the first boot of a WAN Edge Router only. Directs it to the SD-WAN Validator to orchestrate joining it to the network. 
The SD-WAN Controller directs the WAN Edge routers to build a full mesh of IPSec tunnels between themselves. The SD-WAN Controller propagates policy and routing information to the WAN Edge routers with OMP (Overlay Management Protocol). BF (Bidirectional Forwarding Detection) packets are sent over all VPN tunnels to detect if a tunnel goes down and provides latency, jitter, and loss statistics. If multiple tunnels are available, load balancing can be done over the tunnels: active/active, weighted active/active, application pinning active/standby, application aware routing. 

Cisco Meraki provides simple, secure cloud managed networking. Scalable to hundreds of thousands of devices. When Meraki devices are powered on, they automatically connect to the Meraki cloud over the internet. ZTD allows devices to be configured before shipment. Templates can be created for configurations, and new network settings can be cloned from an existing network. Supports SD-WAN and CCM (Cisco Cloud Monitoring).
