Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (networks, servers, storage, etc) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction. Provides on-demand self service, rapid elasticity, broad network access (thick and thin client access), resource pooling, and measured service (metered billing for actual usage).

Virtualization is one of the main enablers of cloud computing, and allows for resource pooling. Virtualized network devices use separate routing tables to avoid security issues with multiple customers using a single physical network device. Clustering can be used for redundancy. 
Colocation, colo: A data center location where the owner of the facility rents out space to external customers. Owner provides power, cooling, and physical security for customers' server, storage, and networking equipment. 
IaaS: Provider provides the facility, network, storage, compute, and hypervisors. OS, applications, and data are managed by the customer.
PaaS: Provider provides the facility, network, storage, compute, hypervisors, and OS. Applications and data are managed by the customer, typically used for software development, and the environment is custom built for ease of software development broken down by programming languages. 
SaaS: Provider manages everything. Office 365 is an example of this; software is accessed through a web portal. 

Cloud Deployment Models
Public Cloud: Infrastructure is provisioned for open use by the general public. May be owned, managed, and operated as a business, academic, or government organization. AWS, Azure, IBM Bluemix, Salesforce. Most common deployment model.
Private Cloud: Provisioned for exclusive use by a single organization comprising multiple customers (business units). May be owned, operated, and managed by the organization, a third party, or a combination, and may exist on or off premises. 
Community Cloud: Provisioned for exclusive use by a specific community of consumers from organizations that have shared concerns (missions, security requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). Least common deployment model, sometimes used in government environments. 
Hybrid Cloud: A composition of two or more distinct cloud infrastructures that remain unique entities but are bound together by standardized or proprietary technology that enables data and application portability (cloud bursting for load balancing between clouds, etc). 

Benefits of Cloud Computing: Scalability - can scale resources up or down to meet demand and adds flexibility through cloud bursting. Business agility - ability to handle expected or unexpected changes Cost efficiency - pay for what you need, removes depreciable hardware assets, and adds more transparent costs Competitive advantage - reducing capital spent on infrastructure releases funds to invest in other priority areas. Productivity - IT staff can focus more on strategic decisions and developing and improving core applications rather than maintaining or troubleshooting hardware. Availability and reliability - all major cloud providers' facilities are located in hardened data centers with security, redundant power, and no single points of failure. Cost - total cost of ownership should be compared to Cloud Computing to determine cost efficacy; most businesses use a combination of both.
